:book: document experimental CA rotation procedure (#9503)
kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api: docs/book/src/tasks/certs/experimental-ca-rotation.md

## Experimental CA rotation procedure

<aside class="note warning">

<h1>Cluster API CA rotation support</h1>

> CA rotation is not supported (nor automated) by Cluster API, please use this procedure at your own risk!
> Rotating CA is a tough Kubernetes topic on its own, it's even harder when everything is wrapped around Cluster API automation and immutability concepts.
> 
> An issue is currently tracking discussions around this feature request : [Automatic CA rotation in CAPI #7721](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/issues/7721). Reading the issue is strongly advised to really be sure of what you are going to do.
> 
> The recommended strategy in CAPI is to destroy and recreate clusters ahead of the expirty date to avoid CA expiry.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rotating CA is a tough Kubernetes topic on its own, and CA rotation is currently not supported (nor automated) by Cluster API; however, we are providing this guide as a reference in case you want to experiment with this procedure. 

We highly recommend testing this procedure in non-prod environments first and reporting back feedback.

An issue is currently tracking discussions around implementing this feature in Cluster API : [Automatic CA rotation in CAPI #7721](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/issues/7721). Reading the issue is strongly advised to really be sure of what you are going to do.

As an alternative, you have to migrate your workloads to newly created clusters ahead of the expiry date to avoid CA expiry (10y).
```

just rephrasing a little bit
cc @vincepri @CecileRobertMichon

</aside>

## CA manual rotation step-by-step guide

### Rotating `cluster-ca`, `cluster-proxy` & `cluster-etcd` CA Secrets

During this step we're going to use the names `CA1`, `CA2`, `pubCA` and `CAkey`. These are:

* `CA1` = old CA that needs to be replaced
* `CA2` = new CA that will replace the old one and signs all new kubernetes certificates
* `pubCA1+2` = means that you should concatenate CA cert1 and CA cert2 (in this order)
* `CAkey2` = this is the private key for the new CA

> <h1>PREFLIGHT CA ROTATION OPERATIONS</h1>

Reviewer: I'm not sure those are actual pre-flight, because we are already doing actual operations; also, H1 leads to a weird title nesting. what about simply dropping this title (and the following) and keeping a simple list of tasks

Workload cluster and management cluster needs to recognize the incoming new CA before switching all control-plane nodes all at once.
By injecting the new CAcert as bundle in all kubernetes components and rolling everything, we ensure that kubernetes api, kubelet and CAPI controller will still work immediately after the control-plane cert rotation.

> - [ ] a working & stable workload cluster should have 3 secrets provisionned with "old" CAs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [ ] in management cluster : a working & stable workload cluster should have 3 secrets provisioned with "old" CAs
```

> - [ ] backup/copy existing Secret as `[cluster name]-**-backup` to keep old state of the workload cluster & allow recovery

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [ ] in management cluster : backup/copy existing Secret as `[cluster name]-**-backup` to keep old state of the workload cluster & allow recovery
```

- [ ] in management cluster : update CA Secret with `pubCA1+2` and `CAkey1`
- [ ] in management cluster : update PROXY Secret with `pubPROXY1+2` and `PROXYkey1`
- [ ] in management cluster : update ETCD Secret with `pubETCD1+2` and `ETCDkey1`

> - [ ] ensure kube-controller-manager still signs using old pubCA only with `--cluster-signing-cert-file` (It doesn't support any CA bundle, as explained in [Kubernetes manual CA rotation - official](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tls/manual-rotation-of-ca-certificates/#rotate-the-ca-certificates-manually) )

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [ ] in workload cluster : ensure kube-controller-manager still signs using old pubCA only with `--cluster-signing-cert-file` (It doesn't support any CA bundle, as explained in [Kubernetes manual CA rotation - official](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tls/manual-rotation-of-ca-certificates/#rotate-the-ca-certificates-manually) )
```

> - [ ] edit workload cluster's cluster-info ConfigMap to match `pubCA1+2`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [ ] in workload cluster : edit workload cluster's cluster-info ConfigMap to match `pubCA1+2`
```

- [ ] in management cluster : rollout all `MachineDepoyment` worker machines used by the workload cluster (e.g set `RolloutAfter` field or run `clusterctl alpha rollout restart` command)
- [ ] in management cluster : rollout `KubeadmControlPlane` machines used by the workload cluster (e.g set `RolloutAfter` field or run `clusterctl alpha rollout restart` command)

> - [ ] rollout restart all pods running in workload cluster

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
This should automatically happen by rolling out all the machines, right?

> <h1>LIVE OPERATIONS</h1>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
same as above

> <aside class="note warning">

Reviewer: I will move this below "replace key & crt files on all control planes & renew cert **on all control-plane nodes at the same time**" + indent

<h1>Machine remote access is required</h1>

> In order to manually replace CA and renew all control-plane certificates at once, this procedure requires logging into systems using SSH. So it breaks CAPI *"no direct access to the machines"* concept and (by nature) will never be generalized nor automated "as it is" by any CAPI controller.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to manually replace CA and renew all control-plane certificates at once, this procedure requires logging into systems using SSH. Most likely, whenever these steps are automated in the future, the implementation will use a different approach.
```

</aside>

- [ ] **pause CAPI cluster reconciliation**
- [ ] replace key & crt files on all control planes & renew cert **on all control-plane nodes at the same time**:

```bash
# as root
# kube CA
echo -n "<new CA private key content>" > /etc/kubernetes/pki/ca.key
chmod 0600 /etc/kubernetes/pki/ca.key

echo -n "<new CA pubcert + old CA pubcert content>" > /etc/kubernetes/pki/ca.crt
chmod 0644 /etc/kubernetes/pki/ca.crt

echo -n "<new CA public key content>" > /etc/kubernetes/pki/cluster-signing-ca.crt
chmod 0644 /etc/kubernetes/pki/cluster-signing-ca.crt

# kube PROXY
echo -n "<new PROXY private key content>" > /etc/kubernetes/pki/front-proxy-ca.key
chmod 0600 /etc/kubernetes/pki/front-proxy-ca.key

echo -n "<new PROXY pubcert + old PROXY pubcert content>" > /etc/kubernetes/pki/front-proxy-ca.crt
chmod 0644 /etc/kubernetes/pki/front-proxy-ca.crt

# kube ETCD
echo -n "<new ETCD private key content>" > /etc/kubernetes/pki/etcd/ca.key
chmod 0600 /etc/kubernetes/pki/etcd/ca.key

echo -n "<new ETCD pubcert + old ETCD pubcert content>" > /etc/kubernetes/pki/etcd/ca.crt
chmod 0644 /etc/kubernetes/pki/etcd/ca.crt

> # regen certs on all VM at the same time !

Reviewer: Not sure about this comment, `kubeadm certs renew all` only works on the machine where this command is executed

kubeadm certs renew all

crictl stop $(crictl ps |grep kube-apiserver |cut -d' ' -f1)
crictl stop $(crictl ps |grep kube-controller-manager |cut -d' ' -f1)
crictl stop $(crictl ps |grep kube-scheduler |cut -d' ' -f1)

# fetch admin token to fill it back in CAPI cluster...
cat /etc/kubernetes/admin.conf
```

- [ ] in management cluster : deploy workload cluster's CA Secret `pubCA2` / `CAkey2`
- [ ] in management cluster : deploy workload cluster's PROXY Secret `pubPROXY2` / `PROXYkey2`
- [ ] in management cluster : deploy workload cluster's ETCD Secret `pubETCD2` / `ETCDkey2`
- [ ] in management cluster : update kubeconfig cluster admin Secret with new admin.conf kubeconfig content from any control-plane node local file

> - [ ] edit workload cluster's cluster-info ConfigMap to only store `pubCA2`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [ ] in workload cluster : edit workload cluster's cluster-info ConfigMap to only store `pubCA2`
```

- [ ] **resume CAPI cluster reconciliation**
- [ ] in management cluster : rollout restart all Worker machines
- [ ] in management cluster : rollout restart all CP machines

> - [ ] (optional) rollout restart all workload cluster's pods

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
This should automatically happen by rolling out all the machines, right?

## Experimental CA rotation procedure

<aside class="note warning">

> <h1>Cluster-api CA rotation support</h1>

Reviewer 2: Nit: Should be "Cluster API" in all cases.
```suggestion
<h1>Cluster API CA rotation support</h1>
```

CA rotation is not supported (nor automated) by cluster-api, please use this procedure at your own risk!
Rotating CA is a tough Kubernetes topic on its own, it's even harder when everything is wrapped around cluster-api automation and immutability concepts.

An issue is currently tracking discussions around this feature request : [Automatic CA rotation in CAPI #7721](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/issues/7721). Reading the issue is strongly advised to really be sure of what you are going to do.

> Cluster-api ultimate goal is to support such feature. But at the moment, the best (and cleaner) strategy is still to destroy and recreate your managed cluster when the CA is expired.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The recommended strategy in CAPI is to destroy and recreate clusters ahead of the expirty date to avoid CA expiry.
```
```suggestion
Cluster-api ultimate goal is to support such feature. But at the moment, the best (and cleaner) strategy is still to destroy and recreate your managed cluster when the CA is expired.
```

> Cluster-api ultimate goal is to support such feature. But at the moment, the best (and cleaner) strategy is still to destroy and recreate your managed cluster when the CA is expired.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Cluster-api ultimate goal is to support such feature. But at the moment, the best (and cleaner) strategy is still to destroy and recreate your workload cluster when the CA is expired.
```

Reviewer 2: I think

</aside>

## CA manual rotation step-by-step guide

### Rotating `cluster-ca`, `cluster-proxy` & `cluster-etcd` CA Secrets

> <aside class="note">

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

> <h1>Keeping things shorter</h1>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> During steap we're going to talk about CA1 or 2, pubCA and CAkey. Let's be clear about it:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
During this step we're going to use the names `CA1`, `CA2`, `pubCA` and `CAkey`. These are:
```

> * CA "1" = old CA that needs to be replaced

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `CA1` = old CA that needs to be replaced
```

> * CA "2" = new CA that will replace the old one and signs all new kubernetes certificates

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `CA2` = new CA that will replace the old one and signs all new kubernetes certificates
```

* pubCA "1+2" = means that you should concatenate CA cert1 and CA cert2 (in this order)
* CAkey2 = this is the private key for the new CA

> </aside>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> **PREFLIGHT CA ROTATION OPERATIONS :**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<h1>PREFLIGHT CA ROTATION OPERATIONS</h1>
```

> Managed cluster needs to recognize the incoming new CA before switching all control-plane nodes all at once.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The workload cluster needs to recognize the incoming new CA before switching all control plane nodes all at once.
```

> By injecting the new CAcert as bundle in all kubernetes components and rolling everything, we ensure that kubernetes api & kubelet will still work immediately after the control-plane cert rotation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By injecting the new CAcert as bundle in all kubernetes components and performing a full rollout, we ensure that kubernetes api & kubelet will still work immediately after the control-plane cert rotation.
```

> - [ ] a working & stable managed cluster should have 4 secrets provisionned with "old" CAs

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [ ] a working & stable workload cluster should have 4 secrets provisionned with "old" CAs
```

- [ ] backup/copy existing Secret as `[cluster name]-**-backup` to keep old state of the cluster & allow recovery
- [ ] update CA Secret with pubCA 1+2 and CAkey 1

> - [ ] update PROXY Secret with pubPROXY 1+2 and PROXYkey 1

Reviewer 2: We should add all the terms used e.g. `pubETCD`, `pubPROXY` to the glossary above.

- [ ] update ETCD Secret with pubETCD 1+2 and ETCDkey 1

> - [ ] ensure controller-manager still signs using old pubCA only with `--cluster-signing-cert-file` (It doesn't support any CA bundle, as explained in [Kubernetes manual CA rotation - official](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tls/manual-rotation-of-ca-certificates/#rotate-the-ca-certificates-manually) )

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [ ] ensure kube-controller-manager still signs using old pubCA only with `--cluster-signing-cert-file` (It doesn't support any CA bundle, as explained in [Kubernetes manual CA rotation - official](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tls/manual-rotation-of-ca-certificates/#rotate-the-ca-certificates-manually) )
```

> - [ ] edit managed cluster's cluster-info ConfigMap to match pubCA 1+2

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [ ] edit workload cluster's cluster-info ConfigMap to match pubCA 1+2
```

- [ ] rollout restart all Workers pools
- [ ] rollout restart all control-plane nodes

> - [ ] rollout restart all pods running in managed cluster

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [ ] rollout restart all pods running in workload cluster
```

> - [ ] rollout restart all pods running in managed cluster

Reviewer 2: Does this refer to the management cluster or the workload cluster?

The term `managed` is a bit ambiguous in a CAPI context so better to use one of the above terms.

Author: I'll read this doc again & clarify everything using only "management cluster" & "workload cluster".

You're right this should be better for everyone

Author: done

> **BIG-BANG LIVE OPERATIONS :**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<h1>LIVE OPERATIONS</h1>
```

<aside class="note warning">

<h1>Machine remote access is required</h1>

> In order to manually replace CA and renew all control-plane certificates at once, this procedure requires to log into systems using SSH. So it breaks CAPI *"no direct access to the machines"* concept and (by nature) will never be generalized nor automated "as it is" by any CAPI controller.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In order to manually replace CA and renew all control-plane certificates at once, this procedure requires logging into systems using SSH. So it breaks CAPI *"no direct access to the machines"* concept and (by nature) will never be generalized nor automated "as it is" by any CAPI controller.
```

> This is only a manual / workaround procedure and should be taken as it is.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is only a manual workaround and may not work as expected on all systems. 
```

chmod 0644 /etc/kubernetes/pki/cluster-signing-ca.crt

# kube PROXY
echo -n "<new PROXY private key content>" > /etc/kubernetes/pki/front-proxy-ca.key
chmod 0600 /etc/kubernetes/pki/front-proxy-ca.key

echo -n "<new PROXY pubcert + old PROXY pubcert content>" > /etc/kubernetes/pki/front-proxy-ca.crt
chmod 0644 /etc/kubernetes/pki/front-proxy-ca.crt

# kube ETCD
echo -n "<new ETCD private key content>" > /etc/kubernetes/pki/etcd/ca.key
chmod 0600 /etc/kubernetes/pki/etcd/ca.key

echo -n "<new ETCD pubcert + old ETCD pubcert content>" > /etc/kubernetes/pki/etcd/ca.crt
chmod 0644 /etc/kubernetes/pki/etcd/ca.crt

# regen certs on all VM at the same time !
kubeadm certs renew all

crictl stop $(crictl ps |grep kube-apiserver |cut -d' ' -f1)
crictl stop $(crictl ps |grep kube-controller-manager |cut -d' ' -f1)
crictl stop $(crictl ps |grep kube-scheduler |cut -d' ' -f1)

# fetch admin token to fill it back in CAPI cluster...
cat /etc/kubernetes/admin.conf
```

- [ ] deploy CAPI cluster CA Secret pub 2 / key 2
- [ ] deploy CAPI cluster PROXY Secret pub 2 / key 2
- [ ] update CAPI kubeconfig admin Secret with new admin.conf kubeconfig content using admin.conf

> - [ ] edit managed cluster's cluster-info ConfigMap to only expose pubCA 2

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [ ] edit workload cluster's cluster-info ConfigMap to only expose pubCA 2
```

- [ ] **resume CAPI cluster reconciliation**

> - [ ] rollout restart all Worker machines

Reviewer 2: By `rollout restart` do you mean to perform a rollout of the machines in the cluster by e.g. setting `RolloutAfter`? If so it might be good to include that as a step here explicitily.

Author: ok

Author: this part is now more detailed

- [ ] rollout restart all CP machines
- [ ] (optional) rollout restart all managed cluster's pods

### Rotating `cluster-sa` keypair

> - *TODO*

Reviewer 2: Are you planning to include this in this PR?

Author: It's not planned at the moment.
We can perfectly remove it to avoid confusion
